Win32 version of IFM
********************

The Win32 version of IFM comes in a ZIP file, and is built using Cygnus
gcc, which requires the library file CYGWIN1.DLL (included in the ZIP
distribution).  This should be in your DLL search path.  The subdirectories
in the ZIP file are:

    progs	The programs, and DLL
    docs	Documentation, in PDF and HTML format
    demos       Example maps

Installation
============

When running, IFM looks for certain files that are contained in the current
directory (e.g. the ifm-pro.ps file for PostScript).  IFM searches for
these files using a standard search path, which you can see by invoking the
-show path option.  But you can change the search path by setting the
IFMPATH environment variable.  It should be a colon-separated list of
directories to search.

IFM looks for an initialization file called ifm.ini in your home directory
(the one pointed at by the HOME environment variable).  If that exists, it
is read.  You can set various defaults there.  See the documentation for
more details.

Graphical interface
===================

IFM is *not* a graphical Windows program -- you won't get any nice friendly
windowy menu-y stuff.  You must run it from the console.  However, there's
a very simple graphical interface to IFM included, called tkifm.  To use
it, you need to have Tcl/Tk installed (probably v8.0 or greater).  If you
don't have it, you can pick up a Win32 version at (or near):

     ftp://ftp.sunlabs.com/pub/tcl

Assuming you have Tcl/Tk installed, you can arrange for tkifm to run when
you double-click an IFM file.  Just create a new file type, with suffix
.ifm, and set the Open command to be:

     <pathname of wish> -f <pathname of tkifm.tcl> "%1%"

If you want a nice window interface for making maps *and* a mouse-clicky
way of drawing them too, you might want to check out IFMapper instead; see
README.txt for details.

Alternatively, you can write a graphical front end which builds an IFM
source file automatically -- but don't forget to send me a copy so I can
include it in the next IFM distribution. :-)

Sources
=======

The source distribution of IFM, for building on Linux, or Windows under
Cygwin, can be found at

    http://www.freewebtown.com/zondo/programs
